the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
alright does someone want to tell me up
here
hello everyone up here what how they got
the right answer over everyone over
there I guess okay I'm coming over there
so we have for the answer we have an MIT
chemistry bag that's quite special well
since you're Delta H value is access the
y-intercept you know that it's negative
because it's negatively and then you
also see that your semi positively so
that you know your slope is positive and
so Delta s also has to be positive
negative to make it positive interesting
that was not that was a different answer
than I would have given but that works
really well which is always great to ask
people so you could also think about
this in terms of you're going from a
situation with a negative Delta G to a
positive value so you know that
temperature is going to make a
difference there and so that would also
tell you how the temperature changes is
also going to tell you the answer to
that so that's great all right so a
couple of announcements as you can see
see what I am wearing on my wegs so I
was pleased with the performance on exam
two the average was eighty four point
seven not at quite as celebratory as
eighty seven point four which was the
average on exam one yeah that's those
are real numbers that's a little weird
but anyway I was still very happy with
the performance on the exam I would like
for exam two be back at 87 though I like
it to be very close to 90 because I want
everyone to have an average around 90 in
the class to demonstrate excellent
knowledge of chemistry so I tried to
write an exam where I feel like if you
have excellent knowledge at chemistry
you can get a 90% or above so this is my
goal I all want you to have this
fundamental knowledge of chemistry that
you can go out and solve the energy
problem that you can go out and be ready
to tackle the next great challenge in
health there's so many challenges facing
us and we don't even know what they are
right now
so the Ebola situation I think is a real
case in point that we don't know what
the next challenge facing us is going to
be so we need to be ready with our
chemistry knowledge the only thing I can
tell you about the challenges facing us
is that knowing chemistry is going to be
really important and tackling those
problems so everyone needs to have an
excellent understanding at chemistry
to go on and do well and solve the
problems of the world so eighty four
point seven really good they're getting
there awesome
so celebratory tights or leggings not
really sure the difference between
tights and leggings anyway I was very
pleased but uh next unit next exam has
thermodynamics chemical equilibrium and
acid-base we're already done with
thermodynamics and moving on so it's
just for the rest of the semester about
halfway there the rate seems to
accelerate so problem set five
thermodynamics it's a little shorter
because you have fewer days to do it so
we want to make sure that you would be
able to get it done by Friday at noon
but that's when it's due it's all
thermodynamics we've already covered all
the material on the problem set you can
do it already right away all right so
also on my wardrobe I'm calming a lot of
my wardrobe today you'll notice maybe
that I have worn this shirt once before
and my goal was really to have a
different shirt every time now this
shirt is appropriate for today's lecture
but I just wanted to say that I did try
to get a different shirt and I ordered
new shirts on thermodynamics and
chemical equilibrium this year and one
of the shirts had to do with entropy and
I just thought I would share with you
briefly cuz it's a good review with
thermodynamics what happens when you do
things related to entropy so just to
sort of show you what happened in
September I was super organized I
ordered my shirts and on October 3rd
they shipped they went through
Indianapolis to Massachusetts
to Newton Highlands about somewhere
around October 8th or 9th that's where I
live so that's really good but the
shirts were about entropy and then look
what happened wait three rooted for
delivery to a new address Jersey City
Cincinnati Ohio worn tail Pennsylvania
and then yesterday they were in
Springfield Massachusetts to which I say
drop a this does not happen when you
order t-shirts about kinetics that's all
I'm saying
those arrive record time thermodynamics
is not always your friend but you can
embrace it and I'm going to try to calm
myself down because we should be at
equilibrium today today the topic is
chemical equilibrium it's the calm part
of thermodynamics well get back to
entropy there will be some mention of
entropy but I'm going to try to calm
down I'm gonna remember my reaction
quotients of my equilibrium constants
and think about chemical equilibrium and
embrace the t-shirt I am wearing because
I feel powerful in this t-shirt like I
can control thermodynamics with the
power of the green lantern with
chemistry knowledge at my fingertips and
I will move forward so chemical
equilibrium is calming but it's also a
dynamic process we can't forget that the
reactions have not stopped it's just the
rate of the forward reaction is equal to
the rate of the reverse reaction so
there's no net change but the dynamic
process is still happening so my goal in
life is to have equilibrium in my life
the amount of work the rate at which
work comes into my office equals the
rate at which I complete the work and it
leaves my office most of you should also
have this goal the rate at which problem
sets come in equals the rate at which
you complete the problem sets and the
problem sets get turned in you don't
want to get yourself
situation where that equilibrium is
messed up where the rate of things
coming in is just nowhere at all equal
to the rate at which things are
completed and going out so goal chemical
equilibrium we want to be at this comp
lace where we're still working hard it's
still dynamic but the net change is good
it's in our favour the amount of work
we're doing equals the work coming in so
I like chemical equilibrium I feel like
it brings hope to thermodynamics so
let's look at an example of a reaction
and we're going to talk a lot about this
reaction in chemical equilibrium so we
have n2 nitrogen h2 hydrogen coming
together to form ammonia and has a Delta
G naught of minus 32.9 kilojoules per
mole so let's think about what's
happening in the beginning of this
reaction when we're just starting this
reaction so we can plot concentration on
one axis and we can have time on our
other axis so time increasing over here
and we can think about what happens when
we're starting our reaction we will have
we can have hydrogen starting out we
have some hydrogen a certain
concentration and it's going to come
down and level out so that's our h2 will
also have nitrogen and as a reactant it
comes down levels out and we're starting
with our product we have no product
we're just starting the reaction with
reactants so product increases and then
levels out so we're decreasing our
reactants increasing our product but the
lines go flat the reaction is still
happening the reaction in the forward
direction is happening and then in the
reverse direction is happening but
there's no net change at equilibrium
because it's reached a state where the
rate of the forward reaction equals the
rate of the reverse reaction and let me
also just point out some arrows and some
nomenclature here so we have this double
arrow and you can see this a couple of
different ways
but this indicates the reactions going
forward and the reaction is going back
and that's necessary for equilibrium the
definition of equilibrium rate for word
equals rate back at equilibrium so
you'll be seeing those arrows a lot all
right so let's think about Delta G now
in terms of what's happening at
different times in this reaction so if
we're just starting out this reaction
and you don't have a lot of products so
you're in this case of pure reactants at
this point you're gonna be moving in the
forward direction you need to make
products and so at this point the
forward Direction is negative its
spontaneous you're spontaneously making
your products you don't have any at this
point and so your Delta G is gonna be
negative so up here with pure reactants
your Delta G is negative now if you
started with pure products you could do
that as well
the nh3 will dissociate and form the
reactants and so that would be over here
and so when you have excess products now
the forward direction is positive it's
not spontaneous because it's the reverse
direction that is spontaneous so over in
this part of the graph over here our
Delta G is positive so if you have pure
reactants you spontaneously go to
products if you approve our products
you're going toward reactants and when
you have the right amount of reactants
to products the right ratio for
equilibrium then you get to equilibrium
and Delta G equals zero at that point so
Delta G is going to change depending on
your ratio of products to reactants so
Delta G changes as the proportion of the
reactants and the products change and
there's an equation to describe that so
we're back now to having a few more
equations in this unit noted a lot of
people forgot to bring calculators to
exam two there weren't so many
calculations we're back to more
calculations again so Delta G equals
Delta G naught plus RT natural log of Q
so let's think about these terms
so Delta G is Gibbs free energy at some
particular point at some ratio of
product to reactant Delta G naught is
Gibbs free energy under standard
conditions in their standard state Q is
our reaction quotient products over
reactants and R is the universal gas
constant and T is temperature so this
equation describes how Delta G will
compare to Delta G naught at a
particular condition a particular ratio
of products and reactants so let's talk
about this reaction quotient Q so let's
look at a made-up reaction a plus B goes
to C plus D and think about that
reaction in the gas phase we think about
that reaction in the gas phase we're
going to be talking about partial
pressures and so Q over here is products
over reactants but here we're writing it
out in a more complicated long way so
let's go through this so we have this P
sub C well what is that that is partial
pressure so partial pressure of gas X
and this is partial pressure of gas C
and C is a product so and D is a product
so we have products over reactants
partial pressure of gas C over P
reference pressure partial pressure
reference which is 1 bar the reference
is 1 bar so we're dividing that by 1 and
this is raised to the little C which has
to do with the coefficients of the
reaction then we have partial pressure
of gas D over our reference raised to
the small D those are our products
products are C and D over reactants
partial pressure of gas a over reference
raised to little a partial pressure of
gas B / referenced raised to little B
but one the number one the partial the
reference is 1 so most of the time
you'll see the following expression Q
our reaction quotient
partial pressure of gas see to the
stochiometry little sea partial pressure
of gas T raised to the stochiometry D
over reactants partial pressure of a
little a partial pressure of B little B
and you will note that because we had
one bar and these are in bars our units
are gonna cancel here so Q does not have
units I knew this would be this should
be very exciting for you you won't be
losing one point for lack of units with
Q there are no units so this is very
exciting so there's the expression that
you'll mostly see for you
for Q and now we can kind of forget that
the reference is there we can ignore the
reference just don't freak out later if
you have no units it's okay all right
so we are also could be talking about
solution and here we're going to talk
about concentrations and a lot of these
problems they're talking about things in
the gas phase that are giving you
concentrations don't worry about it it's
all okay so here our concentration
reference C for concentration is 1 molar
and you'll see this term C in brackets
that means concentration of and so if
you see that like this confidence would
you would express this in words as the
concentration of C again that's a
product over the reference we'll get rid
of the reference in a minute but we'll
keep it for now raised to the little C
concentration of product D over this
concentration reference of 1 molar to
the little D concentration of reactant a
over this concentration reference raised
to the little a concentration of other
reactant B over our concentration
reference of 1 molar raised to the
little B and then again this is
concentration and we can get this
expression which is usually the one you
see of just products over reactants but
I will make one point here that you need
to know how to balance equations to be
able to do these so if you had in the
beginning of the book there was
something about balancing
limiting reagents stuff like that if you
feel like you did not master that you
want to go over it
you need to be able to balance and in a
lot of these problems you may be
thinking about limiting reagents again
all right so that's Q you can see it as
partial pressure and I'm gonna do a
little partial pressure gas review on
Friday or concentrations with these
brackets so at equilibrium Delta G
equals zero and it's a dynamic process
rate of the forward reaction equals rate
of the reverse reaction Q now is the
equilibrium constant because the ratio
of products to reactants in equilibrium
is the definition of equilibrium
constant of the equilibrium constant so
when Delta G equals zero Q equals K so
we now can go back to this expression
that we had and rewrite this for this
situation at equilibrium when Delta G
equals zero so when Delta G equals zero
this is zero and Q is ke ke is products
over reactants at equilibrium and we can
rewrite this or rearrange it now Delta G
naught equals minus RT natural log of K
and that's a very important equation
that you'll be using a lot in these
units so it relates Delta G naught with
our equilibrium constant K and it
depends on temperature
all right so K same expression is Q
except for something very important
which is that the concentrations of the
concentrations at equilibrium so has the
same form as Q but it's only the amount
of products and reactants at equilibrium
so in the gas phase we would write K in
terms of our partial pressures and again
this is this little symbol to remind you
these are the concentrations at
equilibrium and in solution it would be
expressed in molar or something else so
K is again products over reactants but
only those concentrations at equilibrium
whereas Q is
any point any concentrations of products
over reactants for q4k it's those
concentrations at equilibrium all right
so now let's think about Q and K
together so we can rewrite this
expression again we just derived a new
expression for del for Delta G naught
and that was minus RT natural log of K
so we can say Delta G equals and now
have this other expression minus RT
natural log of K plus RT again gas
constant temperature natural log of Q
and we can simplify it
bring out the RTS and now we have Delta
G equals RT natural log of Q over K and
this is again a very important
expression that you'll use a lot because
it tells you about Delta G whether the
reaction is going to be spontaneous in
the forward direction or the reverse
direction depending on the ratio of Q
and K this is a very important equation
for chemical equilibrium so let's think
about what this what this means what
comes out of this so the relationship
between Q and K if Q is less than K what
is the sign of Delta G I can just yell
it out yep
so it's gonna be negative just
mathematically you can look at that
expression so it'd be negative and again
we give you all the equations on the
equation sheet that will be there so you
just need to know how to think about it
and so the forward reaction will occur
and so if we think about this it's gonna
mean that at equilibrium there are more
products than there are at this time for
Q there's less products in the Q
expression K is greater than Q so we
need to make more products so Delta G
will be negative and the forward
reaction will occur so when Q is greater
than K Delta G is positive and so when Q
is greater than K that means there's
more products now in Q than there are at
equilibrium to many products so we need
to shift it in the reverse direction so
Delta G will be positive so again
thinking about the ratio of Q and K
tells you about the what direction is
going to be spontaneous is it
spontaneous in the forward direction or
in the reverse okay so let's do continue
doing a little example we can do a
little calculation here on the board for
the same reaction we're given a value of
K and now we're told some partial
pressures of these gases and asked which
direction the reaction will go so let's
write the expression for Q so Q again is
going to be equal to products over
reactants so Q and our product here is
our nh3 so we're gonna be talking about
the partial pressure because it's a gas
of nh3 and am I done with the top part
of this expression no what do I need
yeah again we need to remember the
stoichiometry of the reaction so now we
have the partial pressure of n2 on the
bottom and I'm good and the partial
pressure of h2 and again I have to
remember that there are three h2s in
this balanced reaction so we have the
partial pressure of h2
the third I can put in my numbers 1.1
squared over 5 0.5 over 2.2 these
numbers may be made-up that's okay
equals two point one times ten to the
minus two and we're back to thinking
about significant figures a lot again in
this unit so I have two there so I'm
going to have these two here and I'm
good but now this is the value of Q and
I want you to tell me with a clicker
question what direction is this reaction
going to go
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
all right so recognized for the most
part that yeah most of these numbers
that Q is a bigger number than K and so
then you have to think about what that
means and so when Q is greater than K
then you're going to go toward reactants
and so you're going to dissociate the
product until you achieve equilibrium
again and so this means when you have a
big Q number you have too many products
compared to the two the equilibrium
State and you want to dissociate your
products so you're going to go
spontaneously in the reverse direction
now I just want to put mention one point
I have for the first part of the course
I only taught that material once before
but the second part I've taught a lot so
I have lots of years of experience of
what people do wrong on exams on this
part and I will share one thing a lot of
students and I faculty - I'm this way
right left challenged so they write left
when they mean right
they write right when they mean left and
so for those of you who are like me and
have this issue draw an arrow when
people draw an arrow they always draw it
in the direction that they mean or they
say toward reactants or toward products
and so I've seen so many times on the
test they'd say you know have explained
the answer beautifully and then write
the wrong direction down so if you are
right left challenged try reactants or
toward products or draw an arrow so that
is my suggestion to you as someone who's
also very bad with saying the right
direction left or right when I mean that
direction okay so what is K tell us so K
tells us about the ratio of products to
reactants at equilibrium and if you have
a very big number
4k it's going to tell you something
about the ratio of those products to the
reactants and there'll be a lot of
products for reactants so let's just
think about this for a minute so when K
is greater than 1 K is products over
reactants at equilibrium that's gonna
mean high products so you'll have a
higher number there but if you have a
small value for K then you're gonna have
low products at equilibrium so this is a
good thing just to think about and check
yourself when you're doing these
problems does my answer actually make
sense and if you see a big value for K
you're like great if I want products I
want a big value for the equilibrium
constant means that this reaction is
going to give me a lot of what I want a
lot of my products because again K is
products over reactants at equilibrium
all right so let's do an example here so
here is an example where K is greater
than 1 it's actually 6.8 for room
temperature
have a Delta G nought of minus four
point seven six kilojoules per mole 2
no2 molecules going to n2o4 so we're
going to start with one bar of our
reactants and no products so we can look
at what that's going to look like in our
plot of concentration versus time and
here the concentration is indicated as
partial pressure which is one type of
concentration so we're starting only
with our reactants it will go down
we'll have no products in the beginning
at time zero no products and that will
grow up the curves will level off as you
reach the equilibrium again the reaction
is still going in the forward and
reverse directions but the rate are
equal so there's no net change in the
concentrations then so now we can
actually do some math and figure out how
this changes and so this is one way that
you can set up these kinds of problems
and we will be doing these types of
problems in chemical equilibrium
acid-base equilibrium of they'll be
any example so it's good to become
familiar with them if you haven't seen
it before so we can calculate the
partial pressures at equilibrium using
this information so when we started we
only had our reactant we had one bar one
point zero zero zero bar to be specific
and we had no product as the reaction
goes we'll form product so it's plus X
some amount of product is going to be
formed how much of the reaction what is
the change in partial pressure as you go
to equilibrium
what what what happens to this what
changes what do I put in this in this
area what here - so I heard - Exeter
City so it's minus 2x because you have
to remember the stoichiometry of the
reaction and so we have two of these
going to one of those so it's minus 2x
and then at equilibrium we have one
point zero zero zero minus 2x is our
concentration of our reactant and our
concentration of product is plus X so
now we're going to solve for this and we
need to write an expression for the
equilibrium constant so why don't you
write that for me
all right ten more seconds
I'd like 90% oh so close
okay so again the trick here you have
products over reactants and you have to
remember the stochiometry so we can go
back over here so we have partial
pressure of our product over partial
pressure of our reactant and we have the
the stochiometry there and now we can
continue to plug in so the concentration
the partial pressure of our product is X
at equilibrium the partial pressure of
our reactant is 1 minus 2x and that
whole term is raised to the 2 so it's
all that whole term is squared and if
you solve for X you will get 0.38 bar so
definitely want to remember calculators
and things on this exam and that value
then is our product so that's the answer
to the partial pressure of the product
because that's what X is another thing
that I've seen on exams is that people
solve for X they're happy to solve for X
but then they don't remember what X was
so keep track of what things belong to
what so then we want to also find the
partial pressure of our reactant that
was 1 minus 2x so here we have 1 minus 2
times X and you can see the significant
figure fund that one can have in this
because we have multiplication division
subtraction and pretty soon we're gonna
have logs significant figure rules so if
there's going to be a lot of fun and of
course then this is our reactant over
here so let's just go back to the
diagram which is up above in your notes
on the same page in your notes and plug
these in and think about what this means
so we've done the math and we see that
our reactant at equilibrium is
point to 3/8 bar and our product at
equilibrium is 0.38 1 bar so K is
greater than 1 more products and you see
that that works out so if you were asked
just to explain what you expected you
could say K is greater than 1 I expect
more products but if you do the math and
you'll often do the math you can
calculate what the partial pressures are
um at equilibrium of the reactants and
of the products all right so now let's
think about the relationship again
between Delta G naught and K so here is
our expression we saw before we can also
rewrite this to solve for K so sometimes
you will be given information about
Delta G naught and asked to calculate a
K at a particular temperature but we can
also think about what we would expect so
if K is large what is going to be true
about Delta G naught and so why don't
you tell me what you think
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
yeah
so it would be a large negative number
and we can think about this that if
you're going to have if you really are
lying on the side of products and your
reaction then that would be consistent
with a bigger value in a negative value
so you can think about again we talked
about in terms of formation is the thing
that's being formed more or less stable
compared to its elements the same sort
of idea you can think about the relative
stability and whether you'd expect more
products or more reactants at
equilibrium based on on this values so
let's do an example and prove that this
is true so let's consider a baking soda
again baking soda works really well for
this unit on thermodynamics and chemical
equilibrium so again we have our baking
soda going to co2 which is very
important the co2 gas which helps our
bread rise and we calculated last week
that the Delta G naught at room
temperature for this process was plus 36
kilojoules per mole and that would mean
that it's not spontaneous in the forward
direction which is really bad for our
bread because we need the co2 gas to
cause it to rise but the good news was
that if we remember to turn on the oven
and baking bread and put it at a normal
temperature in the oven that the Delta G
naught is minus 15 kilojoules per mole
so then it becomes a spontaneous
reaction now we can think about this in
terms of our equilibrium constant K so
if we do the math here at room
temperature K would be 4.9 times 10 to
the minus 7 that is a small number that
means that there is very little product
at equilibrium at this temperature very
little co2 gas to be able to be used to
make our bread rise but now if we
calculate K at this value at a negative
number for Delta G K is now 55 so we
have quite a
of product then to be used to make the
bread rise so you can think about things
in terms of Delta G's and whether
something's going to be spontaneous and
give you the product you want but the
equilibrium constant gives you that
information as well if it's a very small
number you have very little product and
if you want product if you're trying to
industrially make something that's a
very bad thing but if if you have a big
value for K and this negative Delta G
naught value then that's good if you
want a lot of the product at equilibrium
so equilibrium doesn't just matter for
things like baking soda or forming
ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen
chemical equilibrium applies to large
molecules as well such as enzymes in
your body that are catalyzing reactions
so I'm going to share with you and in
their own words and this is a news oh me
and O who I will just mention is an MIT
undergraduate because a graduate of MIT
was an undergraduate here in physics
majored in physics and she is now a
professor of do you want to guess
chemistry that's right she's a professor
of chemistry at Princeton University so
here is a good example of what can
happen and she was very happy actually I
think it was a what 511 one didn't exist
then I think it was 511 when she was
here but nonetheless so here in her
words about chemical equilibrium and the
protein she studies
reductase or R&R for short it catalyzes
the reaction of converting
ribonucleotides are the building blocks
of RNA and to deoxyribonucleotides or
the building blocks of DNA it's the only
means of getting those letters for DNA
so it's important for DNA synthesis and
repair and replication it knows for
example when there is an imbalance in
the the pools of the the letters for DNA
or if there's a lot of the letters of
the RNA and this controls the sort of
state that RNR is in and RNR can be in
an equilibrium of active and inactive
states that are sort of regulated by the
alphabet soup in the cell when it's
active it's very compact but then it has
to make a really dramatic structural
change to go into an inactive state I
have this imagery of transformers
because it's just so dramatic so when
it's active it's compact like when a
transformer is a car and when it's
inactive and it sort of it makes a sound
expands into a robot the letter A are
adenosine pushes this equilibrium from
the active to inactive state and tells
RNR ok we have enough of the DNA letters
to stop for humans it's really important
to study RNR because it's it's the
protein that is essential for making
letters of DNA so it's essential for DNA
replication which is essential for cells
to divide and we want arnar to function
normally for our health but in in cells
that are dividing too quickly such as
tumor cells we want to slow it down so
actually our NR is a really important
target for anti-cancer drugs but also
because our in our exists in every
organism we can start looking at
differences between
different species so for example it
could be antibacterial and not just
anti-cancer that's an example of how you
have a shift between two states and an
active and active state that it's just a
chemical equilibrium and binding one
thing shifts the equilibrium one way
finding something else shifts it back so
chemical equilibrium a lot of nature
works by just suddenly shifting the
equilibrium between different states so
understanding chemical equilibrium is
pretty important all right so now we're
going to apply stress to our chemical
equilibrium and we're going to talk
about principle of law Shotley a so here
a system in equilibrium that subject to
stress will react in a way that tends to
minimize that stress and whenever I talk
to MIT students about this I feel like I
need to really emphasize this point MIT
students experience a lot of stress but
often do not tend to react in a way to
minimize that stress they say all right
I am just struggling with this double
major I don't know what to do it's just
so much work so maybe I should triple
major instead no ask yourself what would
Lashon Li a to minimize double major
single major so this is a principle that
can apply to your life and I recently
saw a chemistry major and we have lunch
who's a former MIT student and now he's
a CEO of a company small company in
Cambridge that's doing designing
computer software platforms who is a
chemistry major and he's doing software
design and building like little computer
tablet things for restaurants so I said
what do you use your chemistry at all
and goes oh I use some things all the
time especially in the shot liaised
principle I'm all about minimized
the stress so that was one thing that he
really grabbed onto in chemistry so
again if you think about this about
minimizing the stress you can predict
the direction of the reaction and in
nature this really works pretty well
so the Shelley's principle gives us a
way to predict the direction the
reaction will go if you ask which
direction will minimize the stress so
let's look at an example we're back to
into an h2 making ammonia so here's a
slightly different plot than I drew over
here now this is a reaction sensitive to
temperature so the equilibrium constant
is going to change with temperature so
every plot of this may look a little
different depending on what temperature
it's at so but some things are the same
if you start with hydrogen and nitrogen
you'll have some of those to begin with
they will be above zero but ammonia will
start if you have no product you'll have
monia at zero and will rise in the other
thing that should look similar is that
as the reaction runs for long enough
it'll reach equilibrium and you'll have
the lines level out you'll reach an
equilibrium state now what happens if
you stress that equilibrium State so say
you add hydrogen and so this line adds
the hydrogen then it goes down then
you're also going to use up some
nitrogen as you're using up the hydrogen
you're just gonna shift it to make more
product now say you make product you add
product sorry you're adding product it's
going to shift to minimize the stress
use up the product have the product
dissociate and make more hydrogen and
more nitrogen so here's the plot now
let's just think about what's happening
at each step so if we're adding more
reactant you have more reactant you have
too much reactant shift to minimize the
stress and you will shift the reaction
toward product get rid of the reactant
use up the reactant let's get back to
the equilibrium condition minimize the
stress
now we can think about this in terms of
Q and K again so when you have reactants
added then Q is going to fall below K
momentarily and so that means if you
think about our equation over here
recall this equation this important
equation so with Q less than K you get a
negative Delta G and that's going to be
spontaneous toward the right toward
products so again you respond by making
more products you shift to the right and
you saw that over here it's shifting
toward products you're using up the
hydrogen you're using up the nitrogen
you're trying to return to an
equilibrium condition now what happens
if we add more product and so when
you're adding more product q is greater
than k momentarily you have too many
products now compared to equilibrium and
when Q is greater than K you get a
positive Delta G and that means that
it's spontaneous in the reverse
direction or non spontaneous in the
forward direction so you shift toward
reactants you shift to the left so again
you can use this equation to think about
what direction is now going to be
favorable and so here you added product
the product gets used up it's shifting
toward reactants and you're making more
reactants until you reach equilibrium
again and we have one minute left for a
last clicker question what happens when
you remove products
all right so let's just take 10 more
seconds
all right so just put it up over here so
that means that Delta G is going to be
negative in that case because you've
removed products so Q is less than K and
so the reaction is going to be
spontaneous in the forward direction
Delta G will be negative and you'll move
to make more products again minimize the
stress you took away products you need
to make more minimize the stress do
problem set five and minimize your
stress
you